# Identifying transportation mode from location data

Location data is recorded from our phones, wearables, and other devices which helps power mobile applications like maps, delivery, and weather. Understanding a "trip," a sequence of location data points over time, can be crucial for a better user experiences and better potential features in these applications. In this project, we aim to identify the mode of transportation from short trips using tools like K-nearest neighbors, random forests, and neural networks for prediction based on aggregate trip statistics (e.g., average speed, average altitude). We find our models are almost 70% accurate in predicting the mode of transportation. 

## Introduction

There are many uses of location data which is used to power an enormous amount of modern mobile technology. We use Google Maps to figure out how to get between destinations in the shortest amount of time, additionally being able to filter by the desired mode of transportation. We rely on timely, accurate weather predictions to decide what to wear. Apps like Ciclogreen reward users for taking "green" methods of transportation. But are we leveraging this to it's full potential? For instance, a user could input that they biked to work for "green" points, but are we able to verify this actually happened? Or, what if some rain/severe storm is approaching while a pedestrian is walking somewhere? We wouldn't need to notify people in cars/subway about this. Automatically identifying the mode of transportation from live or recent location data would solve a lot of these issues.

We propose to use AI techniques to predict the mode of transportation from users' location data. Specifically, this is a classification problem. K-Nearest neighbors is an algorithm that's simple to implement and easily interpretable, as it finds the closest known data points in feature space and predicts that transport label for a new point. Random forests are also a powerful tool for classification and help prevent overfitting to the training data, so even more subtle patterns in new location data can be correctly classified. Neural networks could be valuable given the large amount of data we have (> 1 million points), but the performance improvement could be considered too small to justify the larger amount of time it would take to train and the complexity of doing so. We would like to experiment with all these methods.

We believe these methods are best for this kind of problem. One method we decided not to pursue was Naive Bayes, since it assumes that features are independent. It's wholly possible that the features don't depend *too* much on each other to dramatically decrease model performance, but we see things like the duration feature being closely related to the distance feature, thus hypothesize that it will cause problems.

A very large component of this project will actually be feature engineering. Although the dataset we found had the information we needed, it was formatted in a way such that it'd be impossible to train a model to predict transportation mode as is. We will have to develop shell scripts to clean the necessary files and do lots of time series indexing to filter and match the data that has labels, since there is extraneous data as well. One limitation might be if we find an imbalance in the number of classes represented by the data, which would make the least represented classes have a lower accuracy. This is very possible because modes like "motorcycle" were almost non-existent compared to modes like "car" in our initial scan of the data.

## Setup

